README.md, before:

# Quafka 🦆

![CI](https://github.com/bodaay/quafka/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)

Kafka/distributed commit log service in Go.

*Quafka = Kafka + Go (sounds like a duck!) 🦆*

## Goals

- Implement Kafka in Go
- Protocol compatible with Kafka so Kafka clients and services work with Quafka
- Make operating simpler
- Distribute a single binary
- Use Serf for discovery, Raft for consensus (no ZooKeeper dependency)
- Smarter configuration settings
    - Able to use percentages of disk space for retention policies rather than only bytes and time kept
    - Handling size configs when you change the number of partitions or add topics

## Status

- [x] Producing
- [x] Fetching
- [x] Partition consensus and distribution
- [x] Discovery
- [ ] Protocol
    - [x] Produce
    - [x] Fetch
    - [x] Metadata
    - [x] Create Topics
    - [x] Delete Topics
    - [ ] Consumer group
- [ ] API versioning (more versions to implement)
- [ ] Replication (first draft done)

## Project Layout

```
├── cmd/quafka     command to run a Quafka broker and manage topics
├── commitlog      low-level commit log implementation
├── quafka         broker, server, and core subsystems
│   ├── config     configuration
│   ├── fsm        finite state machine for Raft
│   ├── metadata   broker metadata
│   └── structs    data structures
├── log            logging utilities
├── mock           mocks for testing
├── protocol       Kafka protocol implementation
└── testutil       test utilities
```

## Building

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.23 or later

### Local Build

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bodaay/quafka.git
cd quafka
make build
```

### Docker

```bash
docker build -t quafka:latest .
```

### Running

```bash
# Start a single broker
./cmd/quafka/quafka broker

# Start with custom configuration
./cmd/quafka/quafka broker --data-dir /tmp/quafka --broker-addr 127.0.0.1:9092
```

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details on submitting patches and the contribution workflow.

## Acknowledgments

This project is a modernized fork of [Jocko](https://github.com/travisjeffery/jocko), originally created by [Travis Jeffery](https://github.com/travisjeffery). Travis did the heavy lifting of implementing the Kafka protocol in Go and designing the distributed architecture using Raft and Serf. His work on Jocko and the accompanying blog posts laid the foundation for this project.

The articles he wrote are excellent resources for understanding distributed systems:
- [Building a Kafka that doesn't depend on ZooKeeper](https://medium.com/the-hoard/building-a-kafka-that-doesnt-depend-on-zookeeper-2c4701b6e961)
- [How Kafka's storage internals work](https://medium.com/the-hoard/how-kafkas-storage-internals-work-3a29b02e026)

## License

Quafka is under the MIT license, see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Add context propagation for graceful shutdown and cancellation
Context Propagation:
- Add lifecycle context to Broker struct with cancel function
- Replicator.Replicate() now accepts context for cancellation
- Add FetchContext, CreateTopicsContext, LeaderAndISRContext to Conn
- Context-aware read/write operations with deadline support
- Broker.Shutdown() cancels context to stop background operations

This enables graceful shutdown of replication goroutines, proper
timeout propagation, and clean cancellation of in-flight operations.

Also:
- Create CHANGELOG.md documenting all modernization changes
- Update README to reference CHANGELOG for migration guidance
- Update mock client to implement context-aware interface

README.md, after:

# Quafka 🦆

![CI](https://github.com/bodaay/quafka/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)

Kafka/distributed commit log service in Go.

*Quafka = Kafka + Go (sounds like a duck!) 🦆*

## Goals

- Implement Kafka in Go
- Protocol compatible with Kafka so Kafka clients and services work with Quafka
- Make operating simpler
- Distribute a single binary
- Use Serf for discovery, Raft for consensus (no ZooKeeper dependency)
- Smarter configuration settings
    - Able to use percentages of disk space for retention policies rather than only bytes and time kept
    - Handling size configs when you change the number of partitions or add topics

## What's Changed (from Jocko)

This is a **fully modernized fork** of Jocko with significant updates:

- 🚀 **Go 1.23** (was 1.12)
- 📦 **All dependencies updated** (sarama, raft, serf, uuid, etc.)
- 🔧 **Bug fixes** - Protocol decoder, leader election, panic handling
- 🧹 **Code quality** - Removed panics, gotos, debug prints
- ⚡ **CI/CD** - GitHub Actions with linting

👉 **See [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) for the complete list of changes.**

*If you're migrating from Jocko, the CHANGELOG has a migration guide.*

## Status

- [x] Producing
- [x] Fetching
- [x] Partition consensus and distribution
- [x] Discovery
- [ ] Protocol
    - [x] Produce
    - [x] Fetch
    - [x] Metadata
    - [x] Create Topics
    - [x] Delete Topics
    - [ ] Consumer group
- [ ] API versioning (more versions to implement)
- [ ] Replication (first draft done)

## Project Layout

```
├── cmd/quafka     command to run a Quafka broker and manage topics
├── commitlog      low-level commit log implementation
├── quafka         broker, server, and core subsystems
│   ├── config     configuration
│   ├── fsm        finite state machine for Raft
│   ├── metadata   broker metadata
│   └── structs    data structures
├── log            logging utilities
├── mock           mocks for testing
├── protocol       Kafka protocol implementation
└── testutil       test utilities
```

## Building

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.23 or later

### Local Build

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bodaay/quafka.git
cd quafka
make build
```

### Docker

```bash
docker build -t quafka:latest .
```

### Running

```bash
# Start a single broker
./cmd/quafka/quafka broker

# Start with custom configuration
./cmd/quafka/quafka broker --data-dir /tmp/quafka --broker-addr 127.0.0.1:9092
```

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details on submitting patches and the contribution workflow.

## Acknowledgments

This project is a modernized fork of [Jocko](https://github.com/travisjeffery/jocko), originally created by [Travis Jeffery](https://github.com/travisjeffery). Travis did the heavy lifting of implementing the Kafka protocol in Go and designing the distributed architecture using Raft and Serf. His work on Jocko and the accompanying blog posts laid the foundation for this project.

The articles he wrote are excellent resources for understanding distributed systems:
- [Building a Kafka that doesn't depend on ZooKeeper](https://medium.com/the-hoard/building-a-kafka-that-doesnt-depend-on-zookeeper-2c4701b6e961)
- [How Kafka's storage internals work](https://medium.com/the-hoard/how-kafkas-storage-internals-work-3a29b02e026)

## License

Quafka is under the MIT license, see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
